A sketch of a "simple register machine".

    cabal configure
    cabal install --only-dependencies
    cabal build
    time ./dist/build/virtual-machine/virtual-machine euler-3.sbc 34254526
    time ./dist/build/virtual-machine/virtual-machine fib.sbc 39

10-second architecture overview:

    Parse -> instructions
    Unflatten -> nodes
    Optimize -> nodes
    Flatten -> instructions
    Run -> results + heat

Since time was limited, only two representative optimization passes are done:
dead assignment elimination and constant propagation/folding. This gives about a
25% speedup over the reference implementation on the two example programs.

The optimizations are implemented using a dataflow analysis framework called
Hoopl, which I hadn't used before and felt like learning about. Briefly, Hoopl
optimizations are written in terms of analysis and rewrite passes operating on
lattices of dataflow facts associated with labels in a control flow graph of
basic blocks.

As far as value representation goes, the call and value stacks use unboxed
mutable vectors as in the reference implementation. However, for performance
reasons, this implementation does not use bounds checking; a separate analysis
pass might reinstate the safety of the original implementation without the
per-access runtime cost.

There are a few obvious improvements to be made. In particular, I think even
naïve function inlining would improve performance dramatically, due to the high
call rate. In addition, dataflow analysis could eliminate the relatively high
amount of stack traffic. There don't seem to be many opportunities to improve on
value representation, because there is only a single data type, but the
interpreter could perhaps be made more cache-friendly by localizing instruction
accesses, or by switching to (say) an indirect threaded implementation in C.

As evidenced by the internal instructions I added for the optimizer, there is a
lot that can be done without control over the virtual machine architecture, as
long as the optimized instructions can be inferred from the basic set. However,
broadly speaking, I would like to see the instruction set fleshed out with
instructions that can better express the intent of a programmer, so that the
runtime can more faithfully optimize.

If I had a month to work on this, I estimate conservatively that I could make it
twice as fast.
